---
publish: true
created: 2026-06-24T11:29:39-07:00
modified: 2026-07-01T10:20:15-07:00
tags:
  - language-learning
  - spain
---

During my travels to Spain in April, my mind was genuinely blown at how well I was able to get by. By no means am I claiming to be an expert or even fluent, but I'd never been able to understand Spanish at that level before. I was previously translating back and forth between English and Spanish, and hesitated to speak because I was too scared to mess up. This time I spoke with more confidence and only cared about being understood, as opposed to saying something perfectly. At the time of my vacation, I had around 900 hours of input on [Dreaming Spanish](https://www.dreaming.com).

## Prior experiences with Spanish:

I took four years of Spanish from 7th grade to my sophomore year of high school. The only languages offered by my middle school were Spanish, French and Japanese. Spanish seemed the most useful for living in San Diego. There was a three-year language requirement, but I guess I went above and beyond with four.

Four years of Spanish didn't really do much for me, and I never made an effort to dive deeper into the language in my free time. The formal instruction of learning a language in school didn't help build my listening skills, I was mostly memorizing conjugation tables and indirect object structures. After finishing Spanish 4, I never made an effort to pick Spanish up again. A trip to Mexico City in 2018 had me fumbling my words and letting my mom handle more complex interactions. I was frustrated with myself but made no effort to restart the learning process after arriving home. I was entering the final stretches of college and decided to just let things be.

While in the early stages of planning another trip to Mexico City in May 2024, I decided to download Duolingo to brush up on Spanish. I think I got through a handful of units, but I was still flustered ordering tlayudas from a street vendor. After returning to Austin, I was frustrated at my level of speaking and listening. Two months after, I found Dreaming Spanish through a YouTube recommendation.

## What Dreaming Spanish actually is:

Dreaming Spanish is an app/website for users to learn Spanish through comprehensible input. The methodology behind learning a language through comprehensible input (CI) is to start watching content at a level where you can understand 90-95%, and gradually work your way up to "native" level content. Dreaming Spanish has videos from the Super Beginner level all the way up to Advanced. Each video is made by a guide from a handful of Spanish speaking countries in order to expose viewers to a variety of accents. It emphasizes learning Spanish through immersion and an acquired understanding of the language instead of memorization and formal translation.

Supporters of DS and CI frequently use the example that everyone acquires their first language through CI as a baby, relying on slow speech patterns and high context to absorb the language as opposed to learning in school. Comprehension is the primary step to learning our first language, where we need to understand others before speaking, reading and writing.

## Note on my (second language?) Vietnamese

Learning a language with CI made sense to me because it was how I learned Vietnamese as a child. Vietnamese was the main language spoken at home, and my grandparents' house where I spent most weekends. I was able to understand and speak Vietnamese before entering Vietnamese school at age 7, where I got half-assed instruction in a Miramar warehouse for two hours every Saturday. My parents eventually pulled me out from school after five years, mostly for logistical reasons of pickup and drop-off. To this day, my Vietnamese comprehension is lightyears ahead of my reading and writing.

I should note that I began taking Vietnamese lessons in January 2024, in an effort to brush up my Vietnamese in preparation for a trip in late 2025. After a few sessions of grammar study and establishing a baseline with my tutor, the lessons transitioned into conversation classes. This means I was technically "studying" two languages at the same time, which Dreaming Spanish doesn't recommend. I don't think it's optimal either, but the casual flow of my Vietnamese conversation classes and my existing knowledge of the language didn't significantly hinder my Spanish learning. (Although there was an awkward moment in Spain where I got my wires crossed and threw a Vietnamese word into conversation.) I definitely wouldn't concurrently learn two languages from scratch.

## The purist approach:

There are seven different levels within DS that correspond to how many hours of input you've reached. Each level has an expected amount of Spanish acquisition. Level 1 is starting from zero, and Level 7 is defined as being able to "use the language for all practical purposes", with 1,500 input hours received and an estimated 12,000 known words. You can manually enter outside hours to account for any previous Spanish experience, but I decided to start from zero. However, the beginner and some intermediate content was already "accessible" to me on Day 1.

The "purist" vs. "non-purist" approaches are a dicey topic on the Dreaming Spanish subreddit. Using the purist method is to follow the roadmap exactly. No explicit grammar study, and no speaking or reading until reaching Level 6 (1,000 hours of input.) Even looking up word definitions is not recommended. All you need to do is watch the content.

I recommend taking a peek at the [roadmap](https://d3usdtf030spqd.cloudfront.net/Language_Learning_Roadmap_by_Dreaming_Spanish.pdf), but the thought behind waiting to speak and read is that you want a baseline level of comprehension before beginning any sort of output. After 1,000 hours you should have a certain level of familiarity with the language that you already have a good concept of sentence structure and pronunciation instead of compounding mistakes. I decided to more or less follow the purist approach, mostly because I was lazy.

## What worked:

I'm now able to understand certain "native" YouTube videos, podcasts and all content on the Dreaming Spanish website. My level of Spanish comprehension has already exceeded anything from when I was taking Spanish in school. I was able to successfully navigate customer service interactions in Spain, whether it was a chat with an Uber driver or a paddleboarding tour in Sevilla. I'm 100% sure that people were just being nice but I was complimented on my pronunciation, which was an ego boost. I'm confident that my comprehension levels at 900 hours was more than enough to travel around the country. When asked how I learned Spanish, I just said I watched a lot of YouTube.

One aspect of Dreaming Spanish that has really positively impacted my learning is the exposure to a variety of different accents. Learning Spanish in California, we were never taught the informal, second-person plural vosotros. (And _definitely_ not voseo!) There were instances during the trip where my mom was tripped up by hearing vosotros used in conversation, whereas I'm more or less able to keep rolling with it. About 3 months before the trip, I tried to prioritize content from Spain, focusing on the Basque and Andalusian accents in particular.

This proved to be pretty helpful for a vacation, but I definitely think that watching content from multiple Spanish-speaking countries is the way to go. Unless there's a professional or family tie to a certain accent, I don't understand why you wouldn't want to familiarize yourself with the variety of accents. Last year, Dreaming Spanish hired their first Caribbean guide, Ester. The Caribbean accent probably isn't something I would be exposed to or even choose to learn more about if it weren't for Dreaming Spanish. In addition to viewing my overall progress throughout the last year, seeing my comprehension for certain accents increase has been really encouraging to see.

The best benefit of using comprehensible input to learn a language is getting a feel for a culture organically, instead of through a textbook. I genuinely believe it's made me a more empathetic person, watching people across the world from me experience milestones or go through daily life. Around 400 hours or so, [Luisito Comunica](https://www.youtube.com/@luisitocomunica) and [Calixto Serna's](https://www.youtube.com/@calixtoserna-mexicocooking5842) travel vlogs started becoming more comprehensible. Watching their videos of traveling in Vietnam genuinely made me excited for them to experience everything I connect with and love about the country. I've also been watching a lot of cooking content from South America, whether it's an Argentinian asado or Peruvian chifa dishes. (I'm dyinggg to try aeropuerto.) In January, I planned a day around going to the Latin market here in San Diego so I could buy Argentinian chorizo to make choripan.

Watching all these videos has really reinvigorated my curiosity for learning more about the world. I have so many ideas for travel destinations, meals to cook, books to read...this entire process has never felt like traditional Spanish study and has enriched my personal tastes in an unexpected way.

## What didn't work:

Just because this process doesn't feel like studying doesn't mean that it's not work. Up until 150 hours, anything over 45 minutes a day would lead to my brain feeling tired and it was difficult to absorb more information. 1,000 hours is a lot of time to devote to anything, much less spending all this time on comprehension only. Also, comprehensible content geared for Spanish learners can only be so engaging.

Some users report feeling a slump during the intermediate stages at Level 3 and 4. My intermediate period coincided with things being a little slow at work, so I was able to get an average of 150 minutes every day for a few months. My initial goal was 30 minutes of Spanish each day, but when I realized it would take 3,000 days at that pace to reach Level 7, I felt discouraged. Being realistic about what I wanted out of my learning meant that I needed to put more work in if I wanted results. Powering through the slump was the most difficult part of my Spanish journey so far, but you really just need to push.

Regularly getting two and a half hours of input meant that I was seeing encouraging progress every month. This really motivated me to keep going and force myself to create a routine around getting time in. Any time I had to do clean up around the house, drive to the gym or even paint my nails, I popped a podcast on. However, spending all this time with the language meant I had less time for other hobbies like crochet or listening to music. It got to the point where I was so exhausted of listening to anything that didn't want to watch my favorite YouTubers in English. There are Dreaming Spanish "speedrunners" that get upwards of five hours a day, which is incredible. There's a point of diminishing returns for me (somewhere around three hours) where my brain is fried and I start zoning out. The slow pace wins out for me, even if it means getting 1,000 hours in 23 months.

I know my reading and speaking are lacking compared to the level I'd be at if I spent all this time in conversation classes or with graded readers. I don't think I'm the type of person who can acquire grammar through YouTube only, and I'll have to read up on it on my own. I'm also unsure on Dreaming Spanish's take about not looking up word definitions. There have been gratifying moments of words 'clicking' in my brain when I naturally put two and two together, finally. The ability to be comfortable with not knowing a word and trusting the process that you'll acquire it with more input is going to be a hard sell. I try not to look words up (once again, I'm lazy) but I give up and run to Spanish Dictionary if I've heard the word a few times and still have no idea what it means. Dreaming Spanish is _really_ good at developing your ear for Spanish, but I'll admit that becoming a well-rounded Spanish speaker will take much more than 1,500 hours.

## Who I'd recommend this to:

I'll come clean and say that I don't have a _why_ for why I want to learn Spanish - or if I do, I haven't discovered it yet. Vague reasons like "I was unhappy with my Spanish during my last vacation" or "I want to speak better Spanish on my next vacation" are unspecific and generally don't lead to results. Having a clear focus and tangible goal is supposed to make the journey more achievable , which is why I'm surprised that I've stuck with Dreaming Spanish for as long as I have.

I don't remember the last time I was this consistent with a habit, and that's why I wholly recommend Dreaming Spanish to those who are trying to build this habit up. I like that DS doesn't gamify itself like Duolingo. You can reach a max 'streak' of 7 days but it's so meaningless that I barely pay attention to it. There aren't any leaderboards and I don't feel guilty if I don't meet my goal or listen for a few days.

Ever since the move back to San Diego and especially since coming back from Spain, I've tried to build up my stamina and reach a 90 minute/day goal. Even though I haven't reached the consistency of my intermediate stage, I haven't experienced any regression in my comprehension. Listening is the most foundational and easiest skill to build up, in my opinion. It's something that will benefit everyone, and I wish it was the backbone of my learning in school.

## Closing thoughts and what's next:

I still have 500 more hours to go before reaching the final level of Dreaming Spanish. Although I get most of my input from YouTube and podcasts now, I still aim to watch at least 30 minutes of DS content each day. I pay \$8/month for it, so I may as well use it. I'm diving into the older content on the website, which is more casual and low-budget compared to the well-lit and expertly produced videos they're putting out now. Movies and (some) TV shows aren't 90-95% comprehensible for me yet, so I'm interested to see how my comprehension progresses over the next 500 hours.

1,000 hours is also the recommended input level for starting to speak and read. I was speaking and reading in a tourist capacity during my vacation, but I haven't actually sat down for a formal lesson or conversation. I'm curious about trying the Spanish Coach app by the team behind the [How to Spanish Podcast](https://www.youtube.com/@HowtoSpanishPodcast_Official), one of my favorite sources of learner content. I'm wary about the AI Conversation Coach within the app, but I know I'll need to shake some of the jitters off before talking to a real human.

I've really liked the chatty and informal nature of my Vietnamese lessons, so I'm ultimately eyeing the conversation classes hosted by [Mextalki](https://www.youtube.com/@Mextalki) (again, another one of my favorite podcasts.) There's a clear structure to each class, and the small group aspect means that everyone gets a chance to speak and listen. I'd like to work my way up to private lessons, but I want a baseline level of speaking ability before taking on that expenditure.

For reading, I've been reading a few graded readers and practice short stories online, but nothing serious. The general evolution from graded readers seems to be children's books, non-fiction and then eventually fiction. This seems like a long road ahead - and maybe I should be more intentional about my reading practice, but listening and speaking are much more of a priority for me.

Although this post reads like I've reached the end of Dreaming Spanish, I still have so much more input to receive. It's really more of a check-in, and maybe something to keep me accountable over the next 500 hours. This entire process has been such a benefit to my mental health. I'm not the kind of person that's really into self-help or personal development (there is definite overlap between the personal development and language learning communities!), but this has been one of the best things I've ever done for myself. I have a loose goal of reaching 1,500 hours early next year - see y'all then!
